Feat: Add EventToCarrier to AWS Lambda semantic conventions (#164)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: specification/faas/aws-lambda.md

[faasres]: /specification/resource/semantic_conventions/faas.md (FaaS resource conventions)
[cloud]: /specification/resource/semantic_conventions/cloud.md (Cloud resource conventions)

### Determining the remote parent span context

> Lambda does not have HTTP headers to read from and instead stores the headers it was invoked with (including TraceID, etc.) as part of the invocation event. If using the AWS XRay tracing then the trace information is instead stored in the Lambda environment. It is also possible that both options are populated at the same time, with different values. Finally it is also possible to propagate tracing information in a SQS message using the system attribute of the message `AWSTraceHeader`. A single lambda function can be triggered from multiple sources, however spans can only have a single parent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lambda does not have HTTP headers to read from and instead stores the headers it was invoked with (including any propagated context, etc.) as part of the invocation event. If using AWS X-Ray tracing then the trace context is instead stored in the Lambda environment. It is also possible that both options are populated at the same time, with different values. Finally it is also possible to propagate tracing information in a SQS message using the system attribute of the message `AWSTraceHeader`. A single lambda function can be triggered from multiple sources, however spans can only have a single parent.
```

To determine the parent span context, the lambda instrumentation SHOULD use a `EventToCarrier`. `EventToCarrier` defines how the instrumentation should prepare a `Carrier` to be used by subsequent `TextMapPropagators`.

> The `EventToCarrier` MUST implement the `Convert` operation to convert a lammbda `Event` into a `Carrier`.

Reviewer 2: This EventToCarrier sounds like an ordinary getter function. And in fact that is how it is implemented in some places, e.g. see .NET https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-contrib/blob/Instrumentation.AWSLambda-1.1.0-beta.3/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AWSLambda/Implementation/AWSLambdaUtils.cs#L68-L95

So I would suggest to change the wording here to avoid introducing this new intermediate concept.

Reviewer 2: This PR is also not proposing anything user-configurable beyond the sealed list of strings. If it does, please clarify the wording, or point me to where I missed it.

(Regarding the particular linked instrumentation, a custom context can be extracted by the user and then passed explicitly https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-contrib/blob/Instrumentation.AWSLambda-1.1.0-beta.3/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AWSLambda/AWSLambdaWrapper.cs#L97 which is much simpler to use, implement & understand in this case (but of course the concept would not be applicable to fully automatic / agent based instrumentations).)

Author: In the new revision I tried to make it clear that the EventToCarrier is configurable.

The `Convert` operation MUST have the following parameters:

>   `Carrier` - the carrier that will be populated from the `Event`

Reviewer: Why must the caller provide the carrier to populate?  Should this not be a pure function of `event -> carrier`?

  `Event` - the lambda event.

#### Composite EventToCarrier

Implementations MUST provide a facility to group multiple `EventToCarrier`s. A composite `EventToCarrier` can be built from a list of `EventToCarrier`s. The resulting composite `EventToCarrier` will invoke the `Convert` operation of each individual `EventToCarrier` in the order they were specified, sequentially updating the carrier.

> The list of `EventToCarrier`s passed to the composite `EventToCarrier` MUST be configured using the `OTEL_AWS_LAMBDA_EVENT_TO_CARRIERS`, as a comma separated list of values.

Reviewer: Why?  New environment-based configuration [cannot be added ](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/2891)to the specification at this time.

At the very least this needs to be reduced to `SHOULD`, but I think it should be removed entirely.

Reviewer 3: Does `OTEL_AWS_LAMBDA_EVENT_TO_CARRIERS`environment variable also serve the purpose of exposing user-configurable event carrier per @Oberon00  comment above? https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/164/files#r1254641850 

We should keep this as is or provide some configuration if not already provided (same ask as @Oberon00in [his comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/164/files#r1254641850) )

> Valid values to configure the composite `EventToCarrier` are:

Reviewer 4: I thought the original motivation around `EventToCarrier` was to allow end-users to define their own custom implementations to support custom event types. This only allows for pre-defined options. With that in mind, combined with @Oberon00's feedback regarding http/sqs below, this seems to over-complicate.

> * `lambda_runtime` - populates the `Carrier` with a key `X-Amzn-Trace-Id` from the value of the `_X_AMZN_TRACE_ID` environment variable. (see note below)

Reviewer 2: I think there is actually no need to have such a fine-grained distinction. I think instead there are 3 things that can be switched on/off:
* Propagation using X-Ray from _X_AMZN_TRACE_ID (or equivalent Java sytem property)
* Propagation using X-Ray information in event payload (e.g. SQS system attributes, HTTP headers)
* Propagation using the default / configured propagator using sensible locations in the event payload (e.g. SQS message attributes, SNS message attributes, HTTP headers)

Reviewer: This is not a per-trigger-type distinction, this is enumerating a set of pre-defined implementations of the `EventToCarrier` abstraction that can be selected at runtime.

As for the three toggles you propose, two and three are the same thing as long as a carrier can be extracted from the event and handed to the configured propagator.  One is also effectively the same to the extent that an `EventToCarrier` implementation can always choose to include information in the carrier that was not in the incoming event but instead extracted from the operating environment or some other source.  

The whole point of this is to separate the "Propagation using <propagator>" from the second half of each of those sentences and to give the user the controls they need to choose what works best for them.  We don't need to choose only three options for the user.

Reviewer 2: Please note that in all Lambda instrumentations I have seen that use X-Ray-dependent inputs, they also use an hard-coded X-Ray propagator, disregarding any configured propagator, which is sensible.

> This is not a per-trigger-type distinction, this is enumerating a set of pre-defined implementations of the EventToCarrier abstraction that can be selected at runtime.

I don't really get the difference, but what I meant is: There is no reason to make the user manually select "http" vs "sqs" when the event type can be automatically determined either from the function signature or by inspecting the payload JSON. Selecting them separately would only make sense if you have a function that receives both http and sqs events (not easily possible in statically typed languages like Java, .NET, but possible in priciple -- still probably unusual) and want to only extract context from one of them (I can't really come up with a reasonable use case for that)

Reviewer 4: I fully support not requiring the user to configure something that can be determined automatically. As such, separating sqs and http seems unnecessary.

* `http_headers` = populates the `Carrier` with the content of the http headers.

> * `sqs` - populate the carrier with the content of the `AWSTraceHeader` system attribute of the message.

Reviewer 2: SNS message attributes?

> * `sqs` - populate the carrier with the content of the `AWSTraceHeader` system attribute of the message.

Reviewer 2: This is a bit unclear/inconsistent. For the HTTP headers, you would also have the headers like traceparent, etc. available that may be usable with propagators other than X-Ray. For SQS you specify only the system attributes, which will only contain X-Ray.

Author: I removed the list of pre defined EventToCarrier from the new revision.
